**If statement - theory**

So far we’ve only been able to create programs that always does the same
thing, but programming is much more than that: we can use flow controls.
Flow controls are a way to create more complicate behaviors i.e. running
a piece of code only certain times, running it multiple times, skipping
it, … As you well understand this is a powerful tool for a programmer
and in fact we use this all the time.

A good way to explain flow controls are flow charts, we’ll use those in
a minute.

The simplest flow control is **if**: it checks a condition and if it’s
true executes a piece of code, otherwise skips it. The flow chart for if
looks something like this.

![](media/image1.png)

**If statement - practice**

So let’s create a basic program that checks if the user wrote the right
password and if so reveals him a secret

Console.WriteLine(“Write the password here: ”); //ask the user for the
password

string userinput= Console.ReadLine(); //read what the user wrote

if (userinput==”password123”){

Console.WriteLine(“My secret is that I’m a penguin”);

}

Console.ReadLine(); //we use this command to prevent the windows from
closing

//end

That’s great! We wrote a useful program, but let’s see what’s new:

We used the if statement like this:

if (condition){

Piece of code to execute

}

The if tells the program that we are using that flow control, the
condition inside the round brackets is the one that the computer will
check and the code inside the curly brackets will be executed only if
the condition is satisfied. The curly brackets are always used to wrap a
code block.

Our condition had this structure: variable == value, this is the
structure of the equality, it checks if the variable is equal to the
requested value, if so returns true, otherwise returns false.

Other operators are

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------
  !=                                                                            Not equal

  &gt;                                                                          Greater
                                                                                
  &lt;                                                                          Smaller
                                                                                
  &gt;=                                                                         greater of equal
                                                                                
  &lt;=                                                                         smaller or equal

  condition1 && condition2                                                      It’s the logical AND: returns true only if both conditions are true
                                                                                
  x&gt;5 && &lt;10 //returns true if x is between 5 and 10                      

  condition1 || condition2                                                      It’s the logical OR: returns true either condition is true
                                                                                
  name==”George” || name==”Tim” //returns if the name is either George or Tim   
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- ---------------------------------------------------------------------

**Else statement – Theory**

After our if statement we can write an else statement, that is a fancy
way of saying if the conditions is false do this. In our flow chart
would look like this![](media/image2.png)

The syntax for the else statement is this:

if (condition){

Piece of code to execute

}

else{

Piece of code to execute

}

An else statement can only follow an if statement, a more complex else
statement is the else if, it checks a condition and if it’s true
executes a piece of code, but the condition is only checked if the
previous if evaluated to false. Better explained with a
chart:![](media/image3.png)

The syntax for the else if is this:

if (condition){

Piece of code to execute

}

else if (second condition){

Piece of code to execute

}

We can also concatenate more if/else/else if statements like this

if (condition){

Piece of code to execute

}

else if (second condition){

Piece of code to execute

}

else if (third condition){

Piece of code to execute

}

else{

Piece of code to execute

}

In this case the rules are that the statements are check in descending
order in the code and that the else has to be the last one. We’ll use
those chains if we have multiple options and want the user to pick one.
In case you didn’t understand, here is a chart

![](media/image4.png)

Ok, I admit it I might have a problem with those charts.

**Else statement – Practice**

Using what you learned try to create a program that asks the user for a
password and if the users inputs the right password write your secret,
if he inputs a second password write a fake secret (this is to prevent
blackmail), if the password is wrong just write “You don’t have the
password, go away”.

In case you want to check here is the solution

|

|

|

|

|

|

|

|

|

|

|

|

|

|

|

|

|

|

|

|

V

Console.WriteLine(“Write the password here: ”); //ask the user for the
password

string userinput= Console.ReadLine(); //read what the user wrote

if (userinput==”secretpassword”){ //real password

Console.WriteLine(“My secret is that I’m a penguin”); //real secret

}else if (userinput==”blackmail”){

Console.WriteLine(“I hate biscuits”); //fake secret

}else{

Console.WriteLine(“You don’t have the password, go away”); //error

}

Console.ReadLine(); //we use this command to prevent the windows from
closing

//end

**Else statement – Advanced**

If you just need to assign a value to a variable in the if and else
statement you can use a compact form:

Instead of using this

if (condition){

x=valueTrue;

}

else {

x=valueFalse;

}

You can write this:

x=condition ? valueTrue: valueFalse;
